FINM 32000: Homework 2
Due Tuesday April 7, 2026 at 11:59pm
Problem 1
Consider a particular stock index that is defined to have value equal to the price of a fixed basket
of non-dividend-paying stocks. Suppose that it follows the Black-Scholes dynamics withσ= 0.4,
and that the time-0 index level isS0= 100. Consider a three-month (=0.25 year) up-and-out
European put, struck at 95, with a discretely-monitored knock-out barrier at 114, observed at
times 0.02,0.04,...,0.24. That is, our option knocks out if and only if the index is at or above 114
at an observation time (where the unit of time in this course will always be years, unless otherwise
indicated). Let the constant risk-free interest rate ber= 0.
(a) Write a Python function to price our option at time 0 using a trinomial tree with probabilities
specified in L2.21. Some of the code is already provided for you.
The provided code uses the time step ∆t=T/Nas suggested in class. We will want the
barrier-monitoring times to be represented in the tree, preferably without introducing unequal
time intervals anywhere, so we will want to chooseNa multiple of 25. Your code should
be able to accept any suchN; a user who desires high accuracy can chooseNlarge; a user
who desires high speed can chooseNsmall. For FINM 32000, please report a price usingN
chosen large enough that your output has converged, in your judgment (no proof needed), to
within $0.01 of the true price. In this example,N= 100 will not be sufficient.
The provided code chooses the space step ∆xsuch that the log of the barrier levelH= 114
is exactly halfway between consecutive log price levels of the tree. Subject to this constraint,
it chooses ∆xclose to the recommendedσ√
3∆tvalue. In other words, the constraint is that
there exists an integerjsuch that log(114) is halfway between thejth and (j+1)th log-price
levels:
logS0+(j+0.5)∆x= logH.
and the integerjis chosen such that the ∆xwhich satisfies the constraint is approximately
σ√
3∆t, so we take
j=
log(H/S0)
σ√
3∆t−0.5
Why do we have this “halfway between” requirement? If you try instead putting logHata
log-price level, you will find the accuracy to be worse than the “halfway between” procedure,
for this discretely monitored barrier option.

(b) Consider an up-and-input with the same terms. Specifically, this option has the same strike,
expiry, barrier, and monitoring dates, but it pays at expiry the put payoff only if the index
was at or above the 114 knock-inbarrier at some monitoring date; otherwise, it pays nothing.
Using your part (a) result, find the time-0 price of the up-and-in put.
(c) Consider acontinuously-monitoredbarrier option paying at timeT= 0.25, the amount
(95−S0.25)+1max0≤t≤0.25St<114,
where the indicator variable1(A) :=1A:= 1 if eventAoccurs, 0 otherwise.
(c1) Is the time-0 price of the continuously-monitored barrier option greater than or smaller
than the time-0 price of the discretely-monitored option in (a)? Justify briefly without doing
any numerical calculations (one sentence is enough).
(c2) The continuously monitored barrier option can be replicated by a portfolio ofT-expiry
options, long 1 plain vanilla put struck at 95, and shortαplain vanilla calls struck at 136.8.
The replication strategy is as follows. IfSdoes not hit the barrier before timeT, then simply
collect the time-Tpayout of the 95 put, as desired. IfSdoes hit the barrier, then at the time
whenSisat the barrier, the 1 unit of the vanilla put has value thatexactly cancelsthe value
of the−αunits of the plain vanilla call; so at that time, we close out the portfolio positions,
for a net payment ofzero, as desired.
Solve analytically for the quantityαthat makes this replication strategy valid, and find the
time-0 value of the continuously-monitored barrier option. Do not use a tree.
Problem 1: Coding
Complete the coding of the functionprice
upandoutin the provided filehw1.ipynb. The command
hw1tree.price
upandout(hw1dynamics, hw1contract)must run properly, as it is currently writ-
ten. Moreover, it should also still run properly, if you change the input parameters, such asN(which
you will need to do, asN= 100 is insufficient for the desired level of accuracy), or other param-
eters, such as the volatility (therefore, the0.4volatility, and the other parameters should not be
hard-coded into the functionprice
upandout.)
Do not modify the header ofprice
upandout(unless you want to add “type hints”). You may
modify other lines in the file.
You donotneed to make your code valid for contract parameters that would alter the contract’s
logic. In particular, you may assume thatH > S0> K. Thus, you do not need to strive for
maximum generality. But parameter perturbations that preserve the basic nature of the problem
should run properly.
Problem 2 is at the end of this document

Problem 1: Discussion
▶Note that the introductory paragraph of Problem 1 specifies the optioncontractand the
underlyingdynamics. That paragraph says nothing about valuationmethod/algorithm.
The knock-out dates, described in that paragraph, are features of thecontract. They are
written into the terms of the option. Whatever methodology/algorithm that a modeler might
choose tovaluethe contract (analytic approximation, or tree with 500 steps, or tree with
5000 steps, or Monte Carlo) has no impact on the specification of thecontract, which dictates
that the barrier observation times are 0.02,0.04,...,0.24.
▶A useful diagnostic: test whether your code – with the barrier conditionsremoved– prices
Europeans correctly, compared to Black-Scholes.
▶When you introduce the barrier, one possible cause of error is code that fails to detect that
you are at a monitoring date.
Beware of code that tests whether two floating point numbers are equal by naively using==.
Consider this example in Python:
In [1]: 0.14 / 0.02 == 7
Out[1]: False
which happens because my computer calculates 0.14/0.02 and gets 7.000000000000001.
Floating point arithmetic should not be assumed to be exact. If you need to test whether
two floating point numbersxandyare equal, then instead of using==, it would be better to
test whetherabs(x-y)is smaller than some tolerance.

Problem 2
(a) Interest rate is 0. A non-dividend-paying stockShas time-0 priceS0= 100. At time 0, you
observe the dollar prices of at-the-money (K= 100) European calls onSat 0.5-year and
1-year expiries to be 11.25 and 12.00, respectively.
Find the time-0 Black-Scholes implied volatilities of these two options.
(b) Consider an at-the-money European call onSwith expiry 0.75. Suppose that you try to price
it by assuming that its implied volatility is equal to the midpoint (the arithmetic average) of
the 0.5-expiry and the 1.0-expiry implied volatilities. Under that assumption, what would be
the time-0 price of the 0.75-expiry call?
(c) The price computed in (b) would allow arbitrage involving the 0.75-expiry call and one of the
other contracts. Describe the steps of this arbitrage.
You may assume either cash settlement or physical settlement of these options, but specify
what your assumption is.
Cash settlement of an in-the-money option at timeTmeans that you receiveST−Kdollars
if you are long the contract,K−STdollars if you are short the contract. Physical settlement
of an in-the-money option at timeTmeans that you receive 1 share of stock and−Kdollars
if you are long the contract, or−1 share of stock and +Kdollars if you are short the contract.
(Conclusion: Expiry interpolation should not be done by linear interpolation of implied volatility.
A better alternative would be linear interpolation of the total implied varianceσ2impT).
